---
title: W.D. Snodgrass and Schweickart's Dual Hermeneutic
date: 2020-02-03T11:00:06.737Z
type: post
author: Alessia Zuccarelli
draft: true
tags:
  - hermeneutics
  - snodgrass
  - confessional poetry
  - reader response theory
  - ""
thumbnail: /uploads/lauren-lulu-taylor-vppMdk_GMo4-unsplash.jpg
---
In my last post, I briefly examined Schweickart’s dual hermeneutic that can be applied to androcentric texts. In today’s post, I want to apply that theory to a cycle of confessional poetry by W.D. Snodgrass. This poetry is not usually considered to be ideologically problematic, particularly because confessional poetry links the speaker of the poem and the poet so closely and because the emotional anguish and vulnerability of the poetry tend to lead the reader to believe that this poetry speaks to a universal human condition.

However, anything ‘universal’ should be viewed with caution by a feminist reader - especially when written by a male. This is not to say that all male written texts are steeped in patriarchal ideology. Similarly, not all literature authored by female authors are feminist. Applying theory to literature is an attempt to recognise that not all literature is the same, and therefore should not be approached in the same manner.

In this post I am going to briefly examine the title sequence of Heart’s Needle, a collection of Poems by the poet W.D. Snodgrass. 

According to Schweickart (2008) the dual hermeneutic is carried out in two ways by the feminist reader.
Firstly, she carries out a negative hermeneutic that acknowledges the text’s complicity with patriarchal ideology.
Secondly, she carries out a positive hermeneutic, which ‘recuperates the utopian moment’ (p.491), the emotional response that draws on authentic desire.

Importantly, Schweickart (2008) acknowledges that the emotional pull that draws the female reader into ‘immasculation’ (or reading against herself, see previous post), is not inherent in all androcentric texts. She specifically  asks the question: ‘why do some (not all) demonstrably sexist texts remain appealing even after they have been subjected to thorough feminist critique?’ (p.490). The answer to this question appears to be the emotional response that it is able to evoke from the reader: ‘the male text draws its power over the female reader from authentic desires, which it rouses and then harnesses to the process of immasculation’ (pp.490-491).  Thus, it is the reader’s task to determine the emotional pull of a certain text, a response that I believe is personal and subjective.

In the title sequence of Heart’s Needle, Snodgrass addresses his daughter who has forcefully been taken away from him through a difficult divorce. The sound devices used throughout the cycle confirms and accentuates the emotional vulnerability experienced by the speaker. In poem 4 the use of perfect rhymes: ‘why’/’I’; ‘wait’/‘rate’/‘late’ (Snodgrass, 2006, lines 1-4) creates a childlike tone which is contrasted with the somber content of the poem. The ababb rhyme scheme creates a rhythmical, lullaby effect, directly in conflict with the less innocent and hopeless tone of the poem. In the fourth stanza, Snodgrass uses pathetic fallacy to demonstrate how nature is in tune with his emotional state, noting that 'the asters too, are gray, ghost-gray' (Snodgrass, 2006, Poem 4, lines 16-17). As Phillips (1973) notes, there appears to be a glimmer of hope in the penultimate stanza when they 'find a flower to take,/ with some late buds that might still bloom,/ back to your room' (Snodgrass, 2006, Poem 4, lines 28-30). However, this hope is dashed with the story of the child who cries over the death of a cricket. The poet realizes that if such a miniscule event is able to upset the child, the dissolution of his marriage will have catastrophic ramifications for his young daughter. The disparity between the childlike rhythm and the somber tone of the poem express the poet's concern that his child's innocence will be lost as a direct result of his actions. The contrast between rhyme and content illustrates an attempt to return to childlike innocence that the poet recognizes is futile in light of their family situation. Phillips (1973) suggests that with the negated possibility of hope comes the unspoken realization that he must continue to write, and furthermore, accept the paradox that it is his broken marriage and unravelling family life that provide the creative impetus for his writing.

In poem 7, the poet pushes his daughter on a swing, and observes nature around him as he does so. The game of push-pull on the swing, which generally delights young children, can be monotonous and tedious for the adults who are required to play with them. Glaser (2009) notes that there is an intimacy in the scene painted in poem 7, as the father realizes these moments are fleeting, and will become more and more so as his daughter grows older. Furthermore, Glaser (2009) remarks on the link between the goldfinch and paintings of the Madonna and baby Jesus. Glaser (2009) comments that 
The father enjoys the closeness with his toddler and longs for a momentary return to her infancy, even while the ‘fecund’ and ‘growing’ landscape around him reminds him that an increased degree of separation will be her path to maturity.
p.38
In this image of intimacy, and a connection to the cyclical nature of life, the poet attempts to refute social norms that demand an authoritative relationship with his daughter. In the last poem of the cycle, the poet compares the animal masculinity of the cocks, the porcupines and the male fox to the wailing train returning from Pennsylvania (Glaser, 2007). This comparison demonstrates the poet’s desire to be involved in the more intimate aspects of raising his daughter, such as learning to ‘fry/ omelettes and griddlecakes so I/ could set you supper at my table’ (poem 8, lines 34-36). The poet is at unease with his role as the ‘absentee bread-winner’ (line 21) and desires a closer bond with his daughter. This, however, comes at the expense of the mother, who, as the father grows more ‘able’ (line 38), is accused of allowing the daughter to ‘come here less’ (line 40). Furthermore, the father replaces Mary, the Madonna, in the scene with the goldfinch. This replacement, and the relative tranquility with which the poet replaces the mother, demonstrates the assertion that Gilbert (1977) makes when she suggests that male poets draw on a tradition that supports them. Even in his loneliness and isolation, the poet is still writing from a point of view that is universal, ‘because he is a man, he can readily imagine himself as Everyman’ (p.445). In contrast, the absent mother is required to sacrifice herself, again, as a result of the father’s desire for maternal intimacy with his daughter. 

The authentic, genuine emotion of the poem must therefore be sought out in order to provide a positive, productive reading for the feminist reader. In acknowledging the ideology inherent in the poem, the reader is able to resist a role that requires her to work against herself. She can acknowledge that the father of the poem is himself attempting to find a more productive role within his own family and reject traditional expectations. However, the reader must not forget that the manner in which society has functioned up until this point facilitates his change more readily than it does hers, a reminder of which is interwoven in the allusion to King Solomon. A subject operating in an already privileged position, as stifling as it may be, will naturally be facilitated in any shift he would like to make. This does not attempt to undermine the poet’s right to an intense emotional response at the loss of his daughter, but rather serves simply as a reminder to the feminist reader of underlying social privileges that allow for the expression of these. In order to carry out the positive hermeneutic in the framework outlined by Schweickart (2008), the reader can attempt to understand where the emotional force of the poetry lies. There is certainly a nostalgic element, a sense of loss, and a powerful tone of loneliness that reaches the reader. The poet’s determination that ‘we try to choose our life’ (Snodgrass, 2006, Poem 6, line 64) carries within it an understanding of the way in which the outcome of the disruption of close family bonds damages all of those involved. There is the description of the miracle of life and childbirth, and the child’s very first breath: ‘You took your hour,/ caught breath, and cried with your full lung power.’ (lines 15-16). The loss of the relationship that marveled over the creation of new life within the mother’s womb provokes a sense of sorrow and regret that is available to all readers. The risk for the feminist reader lies not in the loss of the relationship; but rather, it is interwoven in the perception of culpability. 

Gilbert, S. (1977) ‘’My Name Is Darkness’: The Poetry of Self-Definition’, Contemporary Literature, 18[4], doi:10.2307/1208171.

Phillips, R.S. (1973) The Confessional Poets, Illinois: Southern Illinois University Press.

Schweickart, P. P (2008) 'Reading ourselves: toward a feminist theory of reading', in Lodge, D. and Wood, N. (eds.), Modern Criticism and Theory: A Reader, 3rd ed., Harlow: Pearson Education Limited, 485-505.

Snodgrass, W.D. (2006) Not for Specialists: New and Selected Poems, New York: BOA Editions.
